TOM SCOT: Junior Winter Olympics
led me to Lillehammer, Norway, and to that -
bobsleigh track Hunderfossen -
the second largest cooling plant in Norway.
I know when you hear "Norway" and "cooling installation"
you probably think of the Arctic,
which is actually greater than this system,
but this route is really like a huge freezer.
Here the ice does not melt at an air temperature of up to 20 ° C,
so competitors can accelerate
up to 4 g at the last turn,
even when there should be no ice on which to slide.
JAN ODDVAR Tangen: We can keep the ice
in the summer - normal Norwegian summer!
It is built of concrete.
There are many layers of pipes in the concrete.
Ammonia flows into the tubes.
TS: When the liquid evaporates, it takes heat from the environment in which it is located.
90 tonnes of ammonia are circulating in the tubes below the track,
as it is repeatedly compressed
and then evaporated,
to extract the heat. Ammonia, by the way,
is very dangerous if it is not used properly.
JOT: Ammonia is the liquid that quickly consumes heat.
All ammonia flows through 65 km long pipes
and always stays in them.
If anything happens, I can turn off the system
where the ammonia flows out.
It is lighter than the air, so it rises upwards
and no one can hurt!
TS: But the laws of thermodynamics always work.
Can not create cold. You can only move heat.
And in this process you get more heat.
That's why the back of your fridge is warm
and why air conditioners need to cool outside.
And with this large installation, it takes a lot of heat to move.
JOT: First we clean the track
with ordinary water hoses.
In the first week of the season,
and after a dozen days - skeleton slides,
because then the ice is thick enough
to deal with bobsleigh and skeleton sleighs.
TS: Tours are measured to hundredths of a second,
this is important
to keep the ice well frozen,
to be honest for all.
A little more or less friction can affect the result.
And when precision in measurement is so valued, it turns out,
having such a large freezer is quite important.
There are still many videos on the Olympics channel,
as well as on my channel - watch them and subscribe.
Thanks to the Youth Olympic Games
that they led me to Lillehammer.
(Ex: WG)